Introduce app click events (#2070)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/app/app.md

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: App
--->

# App

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

This document defines events and attributes related to client-side applications (e.g. web apps or mobile apps).

## Attributes

<!-- semconv registry.app -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|

> | [`app.installation.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/.md) | string | A unique identifier representing the installation of an application on a specific device [1] | `2ab2916d-a51f-4ac8-80ee-45ac31a28092` | `Recommended` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Author: This is a preexisting attribute, but the markdown doc is new. The entry for this attribute is auto-generated off of the existing yaml. If you want to take this up, please open a separate issue.

> | [`app.screen.coordinate.x`](/docs/attributes-registry/.md) | int | The x (horizontal) coordinate of a screen coordinate, in screen pixels. | `0`; `131` | `Recommended` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer: I think very reasonable requirements will need to use different systems, e.g. screen/window percentage, device pixels vs physical pixels, 0,0 being the top left of a screen vs top left of the not-full-size window, given the different device screen size and density that exists, not to menu windows that aren't full screen.

As such, do we want to add an attribute that is effectively an enum that describes that system the x-y map to?

We can make it optional and default to something

Reviewer: Sounds good.

> | [`app.screen.coordinate.y`](/docs/attributes-registry/.md) | int | The y (vertical) component of a screen coordinate, in screen pixels. | `12`; `99` | `Recommended` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer: Do we want to make the coordinates optional so folks can record a click without necessarily putting in coordinates that they aren't going to use?

Reviewer: Sure. This can be evolved. Stub values could also be used.

| [`app.widget.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/.md) | string | An identifier that uniquely differentiates this widget from other widgets in the same application. [2] | `f9bc787d-ff05-48ad-90e1-fca1d46130b3`; `submit_order_1829` | `Recommended` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

> | [`app.widget.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/.md) | string | The name of an application widget. [3] | `submit`; `attack`; `Clear Cart` | `Recommended` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer: This is a human-readable description or the label that is seen on screen? Do we need to specify what language it is in another attribute or do we simply add something in the description to offer guidence?

Author: Yes, the name is expected to be human-readable. I am not aware of other attributes providing for language, but that's something that could be expanded upon later. This isn't perfection.

- [App set ID](https://developer.android.com/identity/app-set-id).
- [`Settings.getString(Settings.Secure.ANDROID_ID)`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/provider/Settings.Secure#ANDROID_ID).

More information about Android identifier best practices can be found [here](https://developer.android.com/training/articles/user-data-ids).

**[2] `app.widget.id`:** A widget is an application component, typically an on-screen visual GUI element.

**[3] `app.widget.name`:** A widget is an application component, typically an on-screen visual GUI element.

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Session Events

### Event: `app.screen.click`

<!-- semconv event.app.screen.click -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

**Status:** ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue)

The event name MUST be `app.screen.click`.

This event represents an instantaneous click on the screen of an application.

> The `app.screen.click` event can be used to indicate that a user has clicked or tapped on the screen portion of an application. Clicks outside of an application's active area SHOULD NOT generate this event. This event does not differentiate between touch/mouse down and touch/mouse up. Implementations SHOULD give preference to generating this event at the time the click is complete, typically on touch release or mouse up. The location of the click event MUST be provided in absolute screen pixels.

Reviewer 2: How is "application's active area" defined?

Author: It's not defined...but as written here it's intended to mean the area of the screen that is displaying the application.

Reviewer 2: I see. But is it even possible for an agent in an instrumented application to detect clicks outside of the application screen real estate? Is there something similar specified in, e.g., network instrumentation (that network requests made outside of the instrumented application should not be recorded)?

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|

> | [`app.screen.coordinate.x`](/docs/attributes-registry/app.md) | int | The x (horizontal) coordinate of a screen coordinate, in screen pixels. | `0`; `131` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

Reviewer: Similar comments as the other one

Author: Same reply. Closing the thread here so we can continue in one place above.

The `app.screen.click` event can be used to indicate that a user has clicked or tapped on the screen portion of an application. Clicks outside of an application's active area SHOULD NOT generate this event. This event does not differentiate between touch/mouse down and touch/mouse up. Implementations SHOULD give preference to generating this event at the time the click is complete, typically on touch release or mouse up. The location of the click event MUST be provided in absolute screen pixels.

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`app.screen.coordinate.x`](/docs/attributes-registry/app.md) | int | The x (horizontal) coordinate of a screen coordinate, in screen pixels. | `0`; `131` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |
| [`app.screen.coordinate.y`](/docs/attributes-registry/app.md) | int | The y (vertical) component of a screen coordinate, in screen pixels. | `12`; `99` | `Required` | ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue) |

> <!-- markdownlint-restore -->

Reviewer 3: are these two attributes sufficient to conclude anything useful? Or would we expect this event to be reported in a scope of a span? 

I'd imagine you'd want to record `user`, `enduser` and/or application name, device/brower info, os type, etc, would these be recorded as resources? If so, would be great to mention the list of resources that would make it complete in a free-form markdown text.

Author: Yes, they tell you where the user clicked on a screen. That's useful. 

I think `user` or `enduser` or whatever could be added later as needed. The app, device, os, etc. are on the resource. Is there prior art that lists out a resource like you're asking? Does it have to be in this PR?

Reviewer 3: let's postpone it until https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2123 lands - it adds a formal way to document the association

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: App
--->

# App

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

This document defines events related to client-side applications
(e.g. web apps or mobile apps).

* Click events
  * [`app.screen.click`](#event-appscreenclick)

>   * [`app.widget.click`](#event-appwidgetclick)

Author: Yes, but not before I say that all of this is so over-engineered.  🤣

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: App
--->

# App

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

This document defines events related to client-side applications
(e.g. web apps or mobile apps).

<!-- toc -->

- [Click Events](#click-events)
  - [Event: `app.screen.click`](#event-appscreenclick)
  - [Event: `app.widget.click`](#event-appwidgetclick)
- [Attributes](#attributes)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Click Events

### Event: `app.screen.click`

<!-- semconv event.app.screen.click -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

**Status:** ![Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/-development-blue)

The event name MUST be `app.screen.click`.

This event represents an instantaneous click on the screen of an application.

> The `app.screen.click` event can be used to indicate that a user has clicked or tapped on the screen portion of an application. Clicks outside of an application's active area SHOULD NOT generate this event. This event does not differentiate between touch/mouse down and touch/mouse up. Implementations SHOULD give preference to generating this event at the time the click is complete, typically on touch release or mouse up. The location of the click event MUST be provided in absolute screen pixels.

Reviewer 2: The definition of "location of the click" seems a bit ambiguous. 

Is it meant to refer to the device’s absolute hardware display coordinates, or to coordinates relative to the application's visible display area?

I suspect it is intended to be the latter, as absolute display coordinates are often inaccessible on platforms where applications are sandboxed and cannot determine their exact position on the physical screen (for example, in multitasking scenarios on an iPad).

Providing an explicit definition would greatly improve the clarity of this text.

Author: Oh I think I disagree. I think you'd have to be pretty creative indeed to try and specify coordinates for a "screen" click event whose location is specified in "screen pixels" with "application visible area".  If you have specific phrasing you would like to add or edit to clarify, I'm open to suggestions though.

It's definitely not intended to be application visible area. It's intended here, for now, as a first pass, to be absolute screen coordinates.

I understand that this may not be easy (or possible?) on all platforms. I would expect this semconv to evolve over time to include other coordinate systems. This first pass isn't trying to be comprehensive or perfect....and one could imagine another field/enum on the event that later indicates which coordinate system is used. Alternatively, there could be another event called `app.window.click` or `app.visible_area.click` whose coordinates could be relative to app visible area or window or whatever.

> ## Attributes

Reviewer 3: could you please add TOC?

> See the [app attributes](/docs/attributes-registry/app.md) registry for details. 

Reviewer 3: not a strong opinion, but I'd rather not even reference all possible app attributes here. We consider attribute registry as a giant pool of might-be-related things and try to de-prioritize it a bit comparing to the telemetry signals.

If you feel super=strong about keeping it, I'd suggest something like

 ```suggestion
See the [app attributes](/docs/attributes-registry/app.md) registry for all application-related attributes that may appear on telemetry items.
```

I'd also move this section down, to be after all event definitions
